# AI (para mis amigos): Identifying Deceased Plane Crash Victims

## The Story Behind The Crash

### Introduction

On July 17, 2014, a Malaysian Airways passenger jet was shot down on its journey from Amsterdam Schiphol Airport to Kuala Lumpur. The plane was flying through Ukrainian airspace, 50 km from the Russian border, when it was struck by a surface-to-air missile over a region controlled by Russian-backed separatists during the war in Donbas. 298 victims were tragically killed. Identifying and returning body parts to loved ones was a formidable challenge as unidentified human remains (UHR) were dispersed over a 50 square kilometre region. Meanwhile, heartbroken families across the globe were grieving. Aware that each passing day without a body to bury only added to the immense trauma the deceased's families were experiencing, investigators looked to AI to help with returning UHR to loved ones as quickly as possible.

### The Challenges

Investigators at the Netherlands Forensic Institute (NFI) were tasked with the difficult identification process. Frustratingly, they faced a number of obstacles. 

1. **DNA quality**: Fire and explosions during the crash meant remains were heavily burned, thereby degrading DNA.
2. **Site accessibility**: The remains were spread across an active war zone which presented obvious accessibility issues. Body parts continued to arrive in the Netherlands for 10 months.
3. **DNA history**: The investigators did not have previous records of the victims' DNA, simply because they were not criminals! Identification had to be performed by DNA comparison with relatives. DNA donations were limited in some cases due to the death of immediate family in the crash or a lack of contact with other family members.
4. **Volume**: When matching body parts by DNA comparison, the number of necessary comparisons is about the square of the number of body parts that need to be identified. 10 victims in a Blue Wing Airlines crash on April 3, 2008, were identified by 100 manual DNA comparisons. This took 2 days by hand. However, investigators at NFI were forced to make upwards of 90000 comparisons for 298 victims. Comparisons by hand were simply infeasible.

The investigators needed a comparison-based identification framework that offered flexibility in terms of the number of DNA donations and the relationship of the donor. Most importantly, the system had to perform identifications as fast as possible!

### The Solution

Fortunately for the NFI, they had a state-of-the-art forensic software system - named Bonaparte - developed by a team at Radboud University in Nijmegen, Netherlands, during the mid-2000s. The system, which was designed to facilitate quick human DNA-based identification, was the perfect solution for the investigation as it overcame the challenges presented above. It enabled the identification of body parts even in the limited setting of partial DNA matches due to fires; it facilitated DNA donations from multiple family members with great flexibility offered in terms of relationship with the victim (the more distant the relation, the less similar the DNA); and the digital nature of the system permitted 1000s of DNA comparisons in minutes.

After analysing 6,000+ UHR body fragments and 500+ reference samples from relatives, 294 of the 298 victims had been identified within four months of the crash. Another two victims have since been identified, whilst the remaining two have sadly vanished without a trace.

## The Technology

### Identification by Cause and Effect

Consider the sentence: "10-year-old Ben Barlow hit the football towards his grandparents' window and the window smashed." Much to the annoyance of my grandad, who was enjoying his 70th birthday at the time, this statement is true. After observing the cause (Ben kicks the ball), we can estimate the probability of the effect (the window smashed). Human cognition works in this direction. 

But, given the effect "the window smashed" (and my grandad spent the afternoon of his birthday boarding up a window whilst all the family went out to celebrate), we need much more information to deduce the cause (who kicked the ball that broke it or even the fact that it was broken by a ball in the first place). Human cognition struggles to work in this direction.

This cognitive asymmetry was overcome in the 1700s when theologian Thomas Bayes proposed a new rule to employ when working with probabilies. Using the rule - now known as Bayes' Theorem - one can work in the natural cognitive direction by estimating the probability of the effect given the cause, and use mathematical tools to infer the probability of the cause having observed the effect. We call this "inverse probability".

Now, in the context of identifying human remains: If person A and person B are the mother and father of person C (the cause), then matches will exist if we compare the DNA of the child with its parents (the effect). Expanding on the network of three nodes and two arrows (two parents, one child, with an arrow for each parent-child relationship), Bonparte built much bigger networks (entire family trees). This permitted DNA donations from cousins, aunts, and other relatives, rather than just being limited to donations from parents. When comparing all relations, Bonparte was given the effect and used inverse probability to determine the probability of the cause.

A single UHR fragment was identified by the investigators by iterating through all 298 pedigree trees built using Bonparte, entering the fragment's DNA into each tree and observing the probability of the cause given the effect. By considering the trees that offered the maximal probability of the cause, the body part could be identified.

### The Story Behind The Technology: How Neuroscience Can Inspire AI

Bonparte proved to be an indispensable tool for the investigators. It offered flexibility in the number of DNA donations and the relationship of the donor whilst possessing the ability to infer the probability of the cause after being provided the effect. This was all made possible by the technology that underpinned Bonparte: Bayesian networks.

Over two centuries after Thomas Bayes' (1702 - 1761) work on cause and effect, along came Israeli-American computer scientist and philosopher Judea Pearl (1936 - present). Whilst you may not be familiar with Pearl, you've likely heard the phrase "correlation, not causation". Pearl spent his academic career developing mathematical tools for causal reasoning; we can now make "X causes Y" conclusions rather than being limited to "X correlates with Y". During his academic journey, Pearl invented Bayesian networks and because of their dependence on inverse probability, Pearl honoured Bayes by naming the framework after him.

Pearl's breakthrough was a prime example of how neuroscience can inspire AI. His eureka moment came in the mid-80s whilst reading an article by David Rumelhart: a cognitive scientist at University of California, San Diego. The article highlighted when humans read, we first recognise lines and circles which we combine to form letters; these combine to form words at the lexical level which are passed to the syntactic level. It is here, for example, that we decide to expect a noun to follow the word "the". Finally, we reach the semantic level, where we remember the previous sentence referenced a Volkswagen, so we predict the noun following "the" could be "car". Climbing the ladder is permitted by information moving through layers of neurons in the brain.

All the while, information gets propagated down the neural ladder too. When we struggle to read poor handwriting, the syntactic and semantic levels provide context, which helps us recognise messy shapes, letters, and words. The key here is neurons in the brain are passing information in both directions (from the top down and the bottom up) and from side to side. A change in belief in one neuron has the ability to affect the state of all other neurons.

Pearl was convinced, that for computers to reason well under uncertainty, they must adopt a structure similar to that of human neural information processing. It took Pearl a few months to figure out that messages between layers should consist of forward probabilities and inverse probabilities computed using Bayes' framework. But, by the end of the 1980s, his students and colleagues had helped him create a tool that would accelerate the world of machine learning.

in 2011, Pearl won the Turing Award - the highest distinction in computer science - for "fundamental contributions to artificial intelligence through the development of a calculus for probabilistic and causal reasoning". Without his contributions, the field of AI would be lacking many of the tools it has available today, and the families of the plane crash victims would likely have waited much longer to bury their loved ones, or not even been able to bury them at all.

## Appendix - A Note On AI

As discussed in Introducing my blog: AI (para mis amigos), my goal is to close the *AI perception gap*. Whilst I was writing this blog in Valencia in June 2023, my flatmate asked "artificial intelligence isn't here yet, is it?" Well, I walked past a sign in my department this week, which read "Celebrating 60 years of research in computer science and AI at the University of Edinburgh". AI has been around for a long time, and Bayesian networks are an example of 1980s technology still being state-of-the-art today!
